There's that music again. Welcome back to Shiloh Creek, little ones — and if this is your very first visit down here by the water, budge in close beside me. There's always room for one more.
Old Timber! Old Timber — is it the singing evening? Is it the evening we all sing by the water? I've been practicing my big note! It's mostly just a loud one!
Ha — there's Bongo, big as the morning. Yes, little bear, it's the singing evening. Go warm up that big note. I'll be right here by the water.
Now let me ask you something, little ones. What do you do when you're scared? When the light goes down and a place gets dark and quiet, and your tummy goes small? Here's the funny part. You might not be near as alone as you feel.
Here's a thing to hold onto. The dark isn't empty, little ones. It's full of all sorts — chirps and fireflies and friends — and God is with you in it, especially there. So I'll tell you of the evening this whole creek sang in the dark, and the bravest small thing Bongo ever did. The Bible's got a fine line about it; we'll come to it by the water.
Now, this happened on a soft, golden evening, the kind where the sun goes down slow and the whole creek gathers to sing. They were stringing up lantern-moss along the bank — the glowy green moss that gives off a gentle light. And over hopped Bongo the bear cub, with his usual cheerful crash.
Okay — okay — so the SING has FOUR parts, I've assigned everyone a harmony, Bongo you're 'enthusiastic low rumble,' which is just your normal voice, AND we are OUT of lantern-moss on the whole left bank! We need a fresh batch or the far half of the sing is gonna be in the DARK!
Wait — I'm 'enthusiastic low rumble'? That's a PART? I thought I was just... being me. ...Oh no. Am I doing the part right now? Is this the part? Zippy, am I IN the part?
Then someone of GREAT courage must fetch it. The lantern-moss grows only on the far side of the Hollow Log — and as I was SAYING just last week, the far side is where the light goes FIRST. A quest for a BOLD heart. Tragic. Magnificent. Who shall it be?
Ooh — ME! I got this! I'll get the lantern-moss! I'm not scared of a log! I've never been scared of ANYTHING! I'll be back before you finish the first part! Watch me!
...Bongo. ...It's going to be dark over there. ...Real dark. ...You sure?
Pfft! Dark's just daytime with the lights off! I'll hum my big note the whole way! It's mostly just a loud one — but it scares off anything spooky, 'cause there's nothing spooky TO scare off! Easy! Be right back!
OOH — careful of the dark, Bongo! It's THICK over there! You can scoop it with a BUCKET! We TRIED! ...We got half a bucket. ...It was just air. ...But it FELT thick.
A whole BUCKET of dark? ...Okay, that's a little bit scary actually. ...No! No it's not! Buckets aren't scary! I'm FINE! I'm going! Watch me be totally fine about the bucket thing!
A bucket of DARK! The Mudpuppies have OUTDONE themselves. No matter. Go, brave Bongo — to the Hollow Log! And when you return, lantern-moss held high, we shall sing your name into the chorus! ...After the moss. We do need the moss.
...Or. ...He could take a lantern. ...Like a normal creature. ...Nobody? ...Just me, then.
...Garingo. ...He's gone to fetch moss. ...You don't have to announce his entrance for a thing he hasn't done yet.
A GREAT entrance, Shelly, is PREPARED in advance. By the time he returns, the anticipation shall be UNBEARABLE. That is the craft. ...Now, where is my backing night-chorus. Somebody fetch the little buzzers. My chorus is FLAT without them.
You can't FETCH the little buzzers, Garingo, they're WILD, lots of them tune up on their OWN after dark — a whole free orchestra and nobody books it! Should I try to book it? No. Focus. Bongo! Are you OFF yet? The light is GOING!
Wait — wait — Bongo, take the SHORT way, past the willow, NOT the long way round the pond, that's four extra minutes and we are ON a SCHEDULE — the sun sets in eleven minutes, I MEASURED — off you go!
On it! Big note, on! Moss, incoming! See? Not scared! Watch how not-scared I am as I leave very fast!
Now, Bongo trotted off — a little lantern in his paw, just as Shelly suggested — humming his big loud note. And the path got dimmer, the trees leaned close, and his note got... smaller. By the time he reached the mouth of the Hollow Log, the sun had slipped behind the hill — and out there ahead was the dark. And Bongo's feet stopped all on their own.
Right. ...Okay, big note. Come on, big note. ...It's just a log. It's just the dark side of a log. I do this. I'm the one who does this. ...Why won't my feet move? ...Why's my tummy gone all small?
And here's the thing you have to understand about that dark, little ones. It wasn't empty. Not even close. It was only quieter, and cooler, and full of a different kind of company than the daytime keeps. But standing there alone, Bongo couldn't hear any of that yet. He could only hear how loud his own heart had got.
...Okay. I'm gonna say it. To nobody. Just so it's said. ...Everyone thinks I'm the brave one. The one who isn't scared of stuff.
And I'm always the one who says 'I got this.' So everybody believed it. ...I think I believed it too. Right up until my feet stopped.
But I'm not. Not right now. I'm scared. Of the dark side of the log. I didn't want anybody to know.
God — if you're there — I'm scared. And I don't want to be out here by myself. ...That's all. That's the whole thing. I just said it out loud.
And do you know what happened, little ones, the moment Bongo said it out loud? Nothing scary at all. The dark didn't reach for him. It answered him. The crickets came up all around like a little orchestra finding its note. A small warm light blinked on near his paw. Then another. Then ten more.
...Fireflies. ...Whoa. There's — there's hundreds of them. Coming up out of the grass like little lanterns. The dark's not even all the way dark. It's kind of... full of lights.
Wait — were you guys here the WHOLE time? While I was out here being all 'I'm not scared'? ...You saw that, huh. ...Cool. Real cool. Let's all just agree the fireflies didn't see ANY of that.
And the bugs — they're not even spooky, they're just... singing. Like a hundred tiny somebodies all going 'we're here too, we're here too.' I thought it'd be all quiet and empty out here. It's the OPPOSITE of empty.
Indeed they are, young bear — fireflies, every one. Lights blinking in the dark, little signals to find others of their own kind. ...And you're not alone out here either, as it happens. Good evening, Bongo. You'll forgive a passing owl for overhearing.
Professor Hoot! You're — you're out HERE? In the dark? On purpose? And you're not even a little scared?
Scared? Young bear, the dark is my FAVORITE room of the day. We owls were MADE for it — I can see a moth wink at forty paces. This is my morning, my noon, and my afternoon, all at once. Now — you came for lantern-moss, did you not? It grows just across the Hollow Log. Shall we?
...Would you — would you come across with me? Not carry me or anything. Just... be there. Right beside me. I think I can do it if somebody's just there.
Beside you, then. Not in front, not carrying — beside. That is the BEST way across a log, in my professional opinion. You do the walking, Bongo. I shall do the being-there. Off we go — one paw, then the next.
Okay. One paw. ...That's one. ...Hoot, are you still there? ...Say something owl-ish, so my ears know right where you are.
Something owl-ish. There. Right beside you, young bear, exactly where I said I'd be — and we are precisely halfway across, which is the GOOD half, because now there is less log behind you than ahead. A small mathematical comfort. Keep walking. I have you in sight the whole way.
And so they crossed — the owl who loved the dark, and the bear cub learning the dark was still Shiloh Creek. Bongo did every step of that walking himself. But he was not alone for one single one of them. And on the far side grew the lantern-moss, soft and glowing green.
I DID it! I got the moss! And — Professor Hoot — I wasn't even scared the second half! Well. A little. But a little-scared and walking anyway is still walking, right?
It is EXACTLY walking, young bear — in fact it is the BEST kind. Brave is not 'never scared.' Brave is 'scared, and you went anyway, and you let a friend help you remember you weren't alone.' You did all three. A most excellent crossing. ...Now hold that moss high — they'll be wanting their light back at the sing.
Well, Bongo came back across that log with the lantern-moss held high, Professor Hoot gliding beside him, and the whole creek cheered. And when it had quieted, and the moss was strung up glowing green along the bank, I asked him one thing. Bongo... what did you find out there in the dark?
...That it wasn't empty. That's the thing. I thought the dark was empty, and that's why it scared me. But it was full the whole time — chirpy bugs, and fireflies, and Professor Hoot. And before any of them came — when I said I was scared, out loud, to God — I wasn't alone even THEN. God was with me first. Hoot showing up was just how I remembered it.
Okay — so being scared didn't make you NOT-brave, it just made you HONEST, and THEN you weren't alone! That's — wait, that's actually really good, I'm not even gonna over-engineer it. The dark had company. You just had to say the scared part out loud first.
...And you don't have to NOT be scared. ...You just have to remember who's with you. ...That's a different thing. ...A better one.
Ooh — so next time I'm scared, I'm just gonna SAY it. Out loud. 'I'm scared!' And then I'll remember I'm not by myself. ...That's way easier than pretending I'm not scared. Pretending is EXHAUSTING. I was so tired.
...See. ...The brave one was brave the whole time. ...He just got honest about it. ...Suits you, Bongo.
You found it your own selves. Here's the line I promised — from the Bible, a book called Isaiah, chapter forty-one, verse ten. A man named Isaiah wrote down what God promised his people, a long, long time ago, when they were far from home and afraid. Listen.
Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy God.
Now, that's a beautiful way of telling a true thing. It doesn't say you'll never be scared. It says: when you ARE — fear not, for I am with you. You don't have to chase the scared feeling off all by yourself, little ones. You just have to remember you're not alone in it. God is with you, right there in the dark. That's the promise Bongo found first.
And now — a true thing, told grandly. Professor Hoot's Totally True Facts.
Professor Hoot here, with a fact completely true — and this evening, a personal one. Many owls — including me — are NOCTURNAL. That means we're wide awake at night and fast asleep in the daytime — the opposite of you. And our eyes are enormous, to drink in every last crumb of light, so we can see beautifully in the dark.
Wait — so your eyes are too BIG to even ROLL? You have to turn your whole HEAD just to look sideways? That's the best thing I ever heard!
Precisely so, young bear. So big we cannot roll them an inch — which is why we turn our whole splendid head instead. So there is your word to carry: nocturnal — awake in the night, made for it, never afraid of it. The dark, children, is simply somebody else's daytime. A most excellent fact. Good evening to you.
And before we go — three frogs, one enormous question. The Mudpuppy Minutes.
Today on Mudpuppy Minutes — big question, easy answer, we KNOW this one — what IS the dark, and where do they KEEP it all day? Simple. In a bucket. Go.
EASY. The dark is the day pulling a BLANKET over its head! At night the sky gets SLEEPY and tugs the big dark blanket up, and BOOM — dark. And in the morning it kicks it off again. We've SEEN the blanket. It's enormous. Probably gray.
AND ALSO — no, wait. The dark isn't a THING at all! You can't scoop it OR fold it! It's just where the sun isn't shining right now — the sun's gone round to the OTHER side, and the dark is just... the part it isn't lighting up. Huh. There's nothing to hold at all.
...Wait. ...Splash. ...There's no blanket? ...It's just where the sun ISN'T? ...You're RIGHT. ...Huh. So you can't bucket it.
Oh NO. Too sensible! Take it ALL back! A dark you can't even SCOOP? What good is that to a frog with a bucket? Mudpuppies — we have SOLVED it! The dark lives in a BUCKET, and at night the sky tips it out. The end. No letters to the pond, please.
Mm. Now, Splash had it right before the others talked them out of it. The dark isn't a thing you can scoop or fold — it's only the part of the day the sun's gone round from for a while. And it isn't empty. It's full of fireflies, and singing bugs, and friends, and the One who's with you in it. So don't go looking for a bucket. Just look up, and watch the lights come out.
Okay everybody — the moss is GLOWING, the fireflies are out, and I'm doing my big note FIRST! It's still mostly just a loud one! But now it's a loud one that isn't scared! Well — a little scared. And singing anyway. That's the BEST kind!
BEHOLD — the Shiloh Creek Sing, by FIREFLY light! Bongo on the big loud note! Professor Hoot on grandeur! And the little buzzers, at LAST, in my backing chorus! ...Shelly, don't say it. I KNOW I didn't book them. Let me have this.
So that's the evening the whole creek sang in the dark, lit by fireflies, and nobody alone. So remember, little ones: when a place goes dark and your tummy goes small, you don't have to chase the scared feeling off alone. Say it out loud, and remember who's with you. The dark was never empty — and neither are you. Until the next breeze brings us together, my friends.
See you next time... somewhere in Shiloh Creek.